recursion called is ones larger within iteratively structures embed to ability This
language English the in sentence longest the for claims several been have There
Senate the of President be shall States United the of President Vice The
one loved his from letter beautiful a received who man a about story used commonly very a is example punctuation John Dear The
fashion different entirely an in punctuated was it and mistakes punctuation some were there if letter the to happens What
dark before town reach cannot we gas of out is car My
rules grammar and punctuation basic useful most the lists that book reference Handy 2.50 £ School for punctuation and Grammar bookshop to Go
Locale given the of rules the using case lower to String this in characters the of all Converts
argument boolean the of representation string the Returns
exists relationship different or special that where case a of category the in passenger a to driver a of expected be to reasonably is which care or skill of standard objective the to reference by confined or expanded either be will passenger particular the to driver particular the by owed care of duty the which in one be will case the that relationship of category or class different or special a into passenger particular a and driver particular a between relationship the transform clearly circumstances exceptional and special when only is It
Judge the said him, handed just have I sentence long very the for blame to himself only has offences similar for caution formal a and warnings preliminary three given previously been having despite phrases and clauses into words of strings separating by text in meaning clarify to used are which marks and symbols of set a as law in defined punctuation use to failure persistent a of verdict majority a by guilty found was who and week this earlier Parliament through rushed was which Act Punctuation new the under prosecuted was who but reasons legal for revealed be cannot name whose author An
Yes will I yes said I yes and mad like going was heart his and yes perfume all breasts my feel could he so me to down him drew and yes him around arms my put I first and flower mountain my yes say to yes I would me asked he then and yes again ask to eyes my with him asked I then and another as him well as well thought I and wall Moorish the under me kissed he how and yes red a wear I shall or used girls Andalusian the like hair my in rose the put I when yes mountain the of Flower a was I where girl a as Gibraltar and cactuses and geraniums and jessamine the and rosegardens the and houses yellow and blue and pink the and streets little queer the all and yes gardens Alameda the in figtrees the and sunsets glorious the and fire like sometimes crimson sea the sea the and O torrent deepdown awful that O and lamp his with serene about going watchman the Algeciras at boat the missed we night the and castanets the and night at open half wineshops the and iron the kiss to lover her for hid lattice a eyes glancing 2 posadas the of windows old the
a
ab
c ab
bc a
b a
we are friend    good are  we

that know should you

one find officially not could we that is stating are we all as sentence run-on longest world's the be to this claim not do we and hand their on time much too with people by written sentences run-on of short far is it words few a quite with sentence run-on a is this although that add must we but answer an have not do we thus and sentence run-on longest world's the call officially can we that example cut clear no has and endless be can research some doing after found we which one long one into sentences many be should what combining result a as and be should they where marks punctuation a without sentence a is sentence run-on a that found and definition the up look to to was sentence run-on longest world's the finding in step first our and entry an create to decided we sentence run-on longest world's the for look site our to visitors many that finding After
America. of States United the for Constitution this establish and ordain do Posterity, our and ourselves to Liberty of Blessings the secure and Welfare, general the promote defence, common the for provide Tranquility, domestic insure Justice, establish Union, perfect more a form to Order in States, United the of People the We

I. Article.

1. Section.

Representatives. of House and Senate a of consist shall which States, United the of Congress a in vested be shall granted herein Powers legislative All

2. Section.

Legislature. State the of Branch numerous most the of Electors for requisite Qualifications the have shall State each in Electors the and States, several the of People the by Year second every chosen Members of composed be shall Representatives of House The

chosen. be shall he which in State that of Inhabitant an be elected, when not, shall who and States, United the of Citizen a Years seven been and Years, five twenty of Age the to attained have not shall who Representative a be shall Person No

three. Georgia and five, Carolina South five, Carolina North ten, Virginia six, Maryland one, Delaware eight, Pennsylvania four, Jersey New six, New-York five, Connecticut one, Plantations Providence and Rhode-Island eight, Massachusetts three, chuse to entitled be shall Hampshire New of State the made, be shall enumeration such until and Representative; one Least at have shall State each but Thousand, thirty every for one exceed not shall Representatives of Number The direct. Law by shall they as Manner such in Years, ten of Term subsequent every within and States, United the of Congress the of Meeting first the after Years three within made be shall Enumeration actual The Persons. other all of fifths three taxed, not Indians excluding and Years, of Term a for Service to bound those including Persons, free of Number whole the to adding by determined be shall which Numbers, respective their to according Union, this within included be may which States several the among apportioned be shall Taxes direct and Representatives

Vacancies. such fill to Election of Writs issue shall thereof Authority Executive the State, any from Representation the in happen vacancies When

Impeachment. of Power sole the have shall and Officers; other and Speaker their chuse shall Representatives of House The

3. Section.

Vote. one have shall Senator each and Years; six for thereof Legislature the by chosen State, each from Senators two of composed be shall States United the of Senate The

Vacancies. such fill then shall which Legislature, the of Meeting next the until Appointments temporary make may thereof Executive the State, any of Legislature the of Recess the during otherwise, or Resignation, by happen Vacancies if and Year; second every chosen be may third one that so Year, sixth the of Expiration the at Class third the of and Year, fourth the of Expiration the at Class second the of Year, second the of Expiration the at vacated be shall Class first the of Senators the of Seats The Classes. three into be may as equally as divided be shall they Election, first the of Consequence in assembled be shall they after Immediately

chosen. be shall he which for State that of Inhabitant an be elected, when not, shall who and States, United the of Citizen a Years nine been and Years, thirty of Age the to attained have not shall who Senator a be shall Person No

divided. equally be they unless Vote, no have shall but Senate, the of President be shall States United the of President Vice The

States. United the of President of Office the exercise shall he when or President, Vice the of Absence the in tempore, pro President a also and Officers, other their chuse shall Senate The

present. Members the of thirds two of Concurrence the without convicted be shall Person no And preside: shall Justice Chief the tried, is States United the of President the When Affirmation. or Oath on be shall they Purpose, that for sitting When Impeachments. all try to Power sole the have shall Senate The

Law. to according Punishment, and Judgment Trial, Indictment, to subject and liable be nevertheless shall convicted Party the but States: United the under Profit or Trust honor, of Office any enjoy and hold to disqualification and Office, from removal to than further extend not shall Impeachment of Cases in Judgment

4. Section.

Senators. chusing of Places the to as except Regulations, such alter or make Law by time any at may Congress the but thereof; Legislature the by State each in prescribed be shall Representatives, and Senators for Elections holding of Manner and Places Times, The

Day. different a appoint Law by shall they unless December, in Monday first the on be shall Meeting such and Year, every in once least at assemble shall Congress The

5. Section.

provide. may House each as Penalties such under and Manner, such in Members, absent of Attendance the compel to authorized be may and day, to day from adjourn may Number smaller a but Business; do to Quorum a constitute shall each of Majority a and Members, own its of Qualifications and Returns Elections, the of Judge the be shall House Each

Member. a expel thirds, two of Concurrence the with and, Behaviour, disorderly for Members its punish Proceedings, its of Rules the determine may House Each

Journal. the on entered be Present, those of fifth one of Desire the at shall, question any on House either of Members the of Nays and Yeas the and Secrecy; require Judgment their in may as Parts such excepting same, the publish time to time from and Proceedings, its of Journal a keep shall House Each

sitting. be shall Houses two the which in that than Place other any to nor days, three than more for adjourn other, the of Consent the without shall, Congress, of Session the during House, Neither

6. Section.

Place. other any in questioned be not shall they House, either in Debate or Speech any for and same; the from returning and to going in and Houses, respective their of Session the at Attendance their during Arrest from privileged be Peace, the of Breach and Felony Treason, except Cases, all in shall They States. United the of Treasury the of out paid and Law, by ascertained be to Services, their for Compensation a receive shall Representatives and Senators The

Office. in Continuance his during House either of Member a be shall States, United the under Office any holding Person no and time; such during encreased been have shall whereof Emoluments the or created, been have shall which States, United the of Authority the under Office civil any to appointed be elected, was he which for Time the during shall, Representative or Senator No

7. Section.

Bills. other on as Amendments with concur or propose may Senate the but Representatives; of House the in originate shall Revenue raising for Bills All

Law. a be not shall it Case which in Return, its prevent Adjournment their by Congress the unless it, signed had he if as Manner like in Law, a be shall Same the him, to presented been have shall it after excepted) (Sundays Days ten within President the by returned be not shall Bill any If respectively. House each of Journal the on entered be shall Bill the against and for voting Persons the of Names the and Nays, and yeas by determined be shall Houses both of Votes the Cases such all in But Law. a become shall it House, that of thirds two by approved if and reconsidered, be likewise shall it which by House, other the to Objections, the with together sent, be shall it Bill, the pass to agree shall House that of thirds two Reconsideration such after If it. reconsider to proceed and Journal, their on large at Objections the enter shall who originated, have shall it which in House that to Objections his with it, return shall he not if but it, sign shall he approve he If States: United the of President the to presented be Law, a become it before shall, Senate, the and Representatives of House the passed have shall which Bill Every

Bill. a of Case the in prescribed Limitations and Rules the to according Representatives, of House and Senate the of thirds two by repassed be shall him, by disapproved being or him, by approved be shall Effect, take shall Same the before and States; United the of President the to presented be shall Adjournment) of question a on (except necessary be may Representatives of House and Senate the of Concurrence the which to Vote or Resolution, Order, Every

8. Section.

States; United the throughout uniform be shall Excises and Imposts Duties, all but States; United the of Welfare general and Defence common the for provide and Debts the pay to Excises, and Imposts Duties, Taxes, collect and lay To Power have shall Congress The

States; United the of credit the on Money borrow To

Tribes; Indian the with and States, several the among and Nations, foreign with Commerce regulate To

States; United the throughout Bankruptcies of subject the on Laws uniform and Naturalization, of Rule uniform an establish To

Measures; and Weights of Standard the fix and Coin, foreign of and thereof, Value the regulate Money, coin To

States; United the of Coin current and Securities the counterfeiting of Punishment the for provide To

Roads; post and Offices Post establish To

Discoveries; and Writings respective their to Right exclusive the Inventors and Authors to Times limited for securing by Arts, useful and Science of Progress the promote To

Court; supreme the to inferior Tribunals constitute To

Nations; of Law the against Offences and Seas, high the on committed Felonies and Piracies punish and define To

Water; and Land on Captures concerning Rules make and Reprisal, and Marque of Letters grant War, declare To

Years; two than Term longer a for be shall Use that to Money of Appropriation no but Armies, support and raise To

Navy; a maintain and provide To

Forces; naval and land the of Regulation and Government the for Rules make To

Invasions; repel and Insurrections suppress Union, the of Laws the execute to Militia the forth calling for provide To

Congress; by prescribed discipline the to according Militia the training of Authority the and Officers, the of Appointment the respectively, States the to reserving States, United the of Service the in employed be may as them of Part such governing for and Militia, the disciplining, and arming, organizing, for provide To

Buildings;--And needful other and dock-Yards, Arsenals, Magazines, Forts, of Erection the for be, shall Same the which in State the of Legislature the of Consent the by purchased Places all over Authority like exercise to and States, United the of Government the of Seat the become Congress, of Acceptance the and States, particular of Cession by may, as square) Miles ten exceeding (not District such over whatsoever, Cases all in Legislation exclusive exercise To

thereof. Officer or Department any in or States, United the of Government the in Constitution this by vested Powers other all and Powers, foregoing the Execution into carrying for proper and necessary be shall which Laws all make To

9. Section.

Person. each for dollars ten exceeding not Importation, such on imposed be may duty or Tax a but eight, and hundred eight thousand one Year the to prior Congress the by prohibited be not shall admit, to proper think shall existing now States the of any as Persons such of Importation or Migration The

it. require may Safety public the Invasion or Rebellion of Cases in when unless suspended, be not shall Corpus Habeas of Writ the of Privilege The

passed. be shall Law facto post ex or Attainder of Bill No

taken. be to directed before herein enumeration or Census the to Proportion in unless laid, be shall Tax direct, other or Capitation, No

State. any from exported Articles on laid be shall Duty or Tax No

another. in Duties pay or clear, enter, to obliged be State, one from, or to, bound Vessels shall nor another; of those over State one of Ports the to Revenue or Commerce of Regulation any by given be shall Preference No

time. to time from published be shall Money public all of Expenditures and Receipts the of Account and Statement regular a and Law; by made Appropriations of Consequence in but Treasury, the from drawn be shall Money No

State. foreign or Prince, King, any from whatever, kind any of Title, or Office, Emolument, present, any of accept Congress, the of Consent the without shall, them, under Trust or Profit of Office any holding Person no And States: United the by granted be shall Nobility of Title No

10. Section.

Nobility. of Title any grant or Contracts, of Obligation the impairing Law or Law, facto post ex Attainder, of Bill any pass Debts; of Payment in Tender a Coin silver and gold but Thing any make Credit; of Bills emit Money; coin Reprisal; and Marque of Letters grant Confederation; or Alliance, Treaty, any into enter shall State No

Congress. the of Controul and Revision the to subject be shall Laws such all and States; United the of Treasury the of Use the for be shall Exports, or Imports on State any by laid Imposts, and Duties all of Produce net the and Laws: inspection it's executing for necessary absolutely be may what except Exports, or Imports on Duties or Imposts any lay Congress, the of Consent the without shall, State No

delay. of admit not will as Danger imminent such in or invaded, actually unless War, in engage or Power, foreign a with or State, another with Compact or Agreement any into enter Peace, of time in War of Ships or Troops, keep Tonnage, of Duty any lay Congress, of Consent the without shall, State No

II. Article.

1. Section.

follows: as elected, be Term, same the for chosen President, Vice the with together and, Years, four of Term the during Office his hold shall He America. of States United the of President a in vested be shall Power executive The

Elector. an appointed be shall States, United the under Profit or Trust of Office an holding Person or Representative, or Senator no but Congress: the in entitled be may State the which to Representatives and Senators of Number whole the to equal Electors, of Number a direct, may thereof Legislature the as Manner such in appoint, shall State Each

President. Vice the Ballot by them from chuse shall Senate the Votes, equal have who more or two remain should there if But President. Vice the be shall Electors the of Votes of Number greatest the having Person the President, the of Choice the after Case, every In Choice. a to necessary be shall States the all of Majority a and States, the of thirds two from Members or Member a of consist shall purpose this for quorum A Vote; one having State each from Representation the States, by taken be shall Votes the President, the chusing in But President. the chuse Manner like in shall House said the List the on highest five the from then Majority, a have Person no if and President; for them of one Ballot by chuse immediately shall Representatives of House the then Votes, of Number equal an have and Majority, such have who one than more be there if and appointed; Electors of Number whole the of Majority a be Number such if President, the be shall Votes of Number greatest the having Person The counted. be then shall Votes the and Certificates, the all open Representatives, of House and Senate the of Presence the in shall, Senate the of President The Senate. the of President the to directed States, United the of Government the of Seat the to sealed transmit and certify, and sign shall they List which each; for Votes of Number the of and for, voted Persons the all of List a make shall they And themselves. with State same the of Inhabitant an be not shall least at one whom of Persons, two for Ballot by vote and States, respective their in meet shall Electors The

States. United the throughout same the be shall Day which Votes; their give shall they which on Day the and Electors, the chusing of Time the determine may Congress The

States. United the within Resident a Years fourteen been and Years, five thirty of Age the to attained have not shall who Office that to eligible be Person any shall neither President; of Office the to eligible be shall Constitution, this of Adoption the of time the at States, United the of Citizen a or Citizen, born natural a except Person No

elected. be shall President a or removed, be Disability the until accordingly, act shall Officer such and President, as act then shall Officer what declaring President, Vice and President the of both Inability, or Resignation Death, Removal, of Case the for provide Law by may Congress the and President, Vice the on devolve shall Same the Office, said the of Duties and Powers the discharge to Inability or Resignation, Death, his of or Office, from President the of Removal the of Case In

them. of any or States, United the from Emolument other any Period that within receive not shall he and elected, been have shall he which for Period the during diminished nor increased be neither shall which Compensation, a Services, his for receive Times, stated at shall, President The

States." United the of Constitution the defend and protect preserve, Ability, my of best the to will and States, United the of President of Office the execute faithfully will I that affirm) (or swear solemnly do Affirmation:--"I or Oath following the take shall he Office, his of Execution the on enter he Before

2. Section.

Impeachment. of Cases in except States, United the against Offences for Pardons and Reprieves grant to Power have shall he and Offices, respective their of Duties the to relating Subject any upon Departments, executive the of each in Officer principal the of writing, in Opinion, the require may he States; United the of Service actual the into called when States, several the of Militia the of and States, United the of Navy and Army the of Chief in Commander be shall President The

Departments. of Heads the in or Law, of Courts the in alone, President the in proper, think they as Officers, inferior such of Appointment the vest Law by may Congress the but Law: by established be shall which and for, provided otherwise herein not are Appointments whose States, United the of Officers other all and Court, supreme the of Judges Consuls, and Ministers public other Ambassadors, appoint shall Senate, the of Consent and Advice the with and by and nominate, shall he and concur; present Senators the of thirds two provided Treaties, make to Senate, the of Consent and Advice the with and by Power, have shall He

Session. next their of End the at expire shall which Commissions granting by Senate, the of Recess the during happen may that Vacancies all up fill to Power have shall President The

3. Section.

States. United the of Officers the all Commission shall and executed, faithfully be Laws the that Care take shall he Ministers; public other and Ambassadors receive shall he proper; think shall he as Time such to them adjourn may he Adjournment, of Time the to Respect with them, between Disagreement of Case in and them, of either or Houses, both convene Occasions, extraordinary on may, he expedient; and necessary judge shall he as Measures such Consideration their to recommend and Union, the of State the of Information Congress the to give time to time from shall He

4. Section.

Misdemeanors. and Crimes high other or Bribery, Treason, of, Conviction and for, Impeachment on Office from removed be shall States, United the of Officers civil all and President Vice President, The

III. Article

1. Section.

Office. in Continuance their during diminished be not shall which Compensation, a Services their for receive Times, stated at shall, and Behaviour, good during Offices their hold shall Courts, inferior and supreme the of both Judges, The establish. and ordain time to time from may Congress the as Courts inferior such in and Court, supreme one in vested be shall States United the of Power judicial The

2. Section.

Subjects. or Citizens States, foreign and thereof, Citizens the or State, a between and States, different of Grants under Lands claiming State same the of Citizens States,--between different of Citizens State,--between another of Citizens and State a between States;-- more or two between Controversies Party;--to a be shall States United the which to Controversies Jurisdiction;--to maritime and admiralty of Cases all Consuls;--to and Ministers public other Ambassadors, affecting Cases all Authority;--to their under made, be shall which or made, Treaties and States, United the of Laws the Constitution, this under arising Equity, and Law in Cases, all to extend shall Power judicial The

make. shall Congress the as Regulations such under and Exceptions, such with Fact, and Law to as both Jurisdiction, appellate have shall Court supreme the mentioned, before Cases other the all In Jurisdiction. original have shall Court supreme the Party, be shall State a which in those and Consuls, and Ministers public other Ambassadors, affecting Cases all In

directed. have Law by may Congress the as Places or Place such at be shall Trial the State, any within committed not when but committed; been have shall Crimes said the where State the in held be shall Trial such and Jury; by be shall Impeachment, of Cases in except Crimes, all of Trial The

3. Section.

Court. open in Confession on or Act, overt same the to Witnesses two of Testimony the on unless Treason of convicted be shall Person No Comfort. and Aid them giving Enemies, their to adhering in or them, against War levying in only consist shall States, United the against Treason

attainted. Person the of Life the during except Forfeiture or Blood, of Corruption work shall Treason of Attainder no but Treason, of Punishment the declare to Power have shall Congress The

IV. Article.

1. Section.

thereof. Effect the and proved, be shall Proceedings and Records Acts, such which in Manner the prescribe Laws general by may Congress the And State. other every of Proceedings judicial and Records, Acts, public the to State each in given be shall Credit and Faith Full

2. Section.

States. several the in Citizens of Immunities and Privileges all to entitled be shall State each of Citizens The

Crime. the of Jurisdiction having State the to removed be to up, delivered be fled, he which from State the of Authority executive the of Demand on shall State, another in found be and Justice, from flee shall who Crime, other or Felony, Treason, with State any in charged Person A

due. be may Labour or Service such whom to Party the of Claim on up delivered be shall but Labour, or Service such from discharged be therein, Regulation or Law any of Consequence in shall, another, into escaping thereof, Laws the under State, one in Labour or Service to held Person No

3. Section.

Congress. the of as well as concerned States the of Legislatures the of Consent the without States, of Parts or States, more or two of Junction the by formed be State any nor State; other any of Jurisdiction the within erected or formed be shall State new no but Union; this into Congress the by admitted be may States New

State. particular any of or States, United the of Claims any Prejudice to as construed so be shall Constitution this in nothing and States; United the to belonging Property other or Territory the respecting Regulations and Rules needful all make and of dispose to Power have shall Congress The

4. Section.

Violence. domestic against convened), be cannot Legislature the (when Executive the of or Legislature, the of Application on and Invasion; against them of each protect shall and Government, of Form Republican a Union this in State every to guarantee shall States United The

V. Article.

Senate. the in Suffrage equal its of deprived be shall Consent, its without State, no that and Article; first the of Section Ninth the in Clauses fourth and first the affect Manner any in shall eight and hundred eight thousand One Year the to prior made be may which Amendment no that Provided Congress; the by proposed be may Ratification of Mode other the or one the as thereof, fourths three in Conventions by or States, several the of fourths three of Legislatures the by ratified when Constitution, this of Part as Purposes, and Intents all to valid be shall Case, either in which, Amendments, proposing for Convention a call shall States, several the of thirds two of Legislatures the of Application the on or, Constitution, this to Amendments propose shall necessary, it deem shall Houses both of thirds two whenever Congress, The

VI. Article.

Confederation. the under as Constitution, this under States United the against valid as be shall Constitution, this of Adoption the before into, entered Engagements and contracted Debts All

notwithstanding. Contrary the to State any of Laws or Constitution the in Thing any thereby, bound be shall State every in Judges the and Land; the of Law supreme the be shall States, United the of Authority the under made, be shall which or made, Treaties all and thereof; Pursuance in made be shall which States United the of Laws the and Constitution, This

States. United the under Trust public or Office any to Qualification a as required be ever shall Test religious no but Constitution; this support to Affirmation, or Oath by bound be shall States, several the of and States United the of both Officers, judicial and executive all and Legislatures, State several the of Members the and mentioned, before Representatives and Senators The

VII. Article.

Same. the ratifying so States the between Constitution this of Establishment the for sufficient be shall States, nine of Conventions the of Ratification The

Page. second the of Lines fourth forty and third forty the between interlined being "the" Word the and Page first the of Lines third thirty and second thirty the between interlined being tried" "is Words The Page, first the of Line fifteenth the in Erazure an on written partly being "Thirty" Word the Page, first the of Lines eighth and seventh the between interlined being "the," Word, The

Secretary Jackson William Attest

Names our subscribed hereunto have We whereof witness In Twelfth the America of States United the of Independance the of and seven Eighty and hundred seven thousand one Lord our of Year the in September of Day Seventeenth the present States the of Consent Unanimous the by Convention in done

nation. our of history the in freedom for demonstration greatest the as history in down go will what in today you with join to happy am I
captivity. their of night long the end to daybreak joyous a as came It injustice. withering of flames the in seared been had who slaves Negro of millions to hope of light beacon great a as came decree momentous This Proclamation. Emancipation the signed today, stand we shadow symbolic whose in American, great a ago, years score Five
condition. shameful a dramatize to today here come have we So land. own his in exile an himself finds and society American of corners the in languishing still is Negro the later, years hundred One prosperity. material of ocean vast a of midst the in poverty of island lonely a on lives Negro the later, years hundred One discrimination. of chains the and segregation of manacles the by crippled sadly still is Negro the of life the later, years hundred One free. not is still Negro the later, years hundred one But
happiness. of pursuit the and liberty, life, of rights unalienable the guaranteed be would men, white as well as men black yes, men, all that promise a was note This heir. fall to was American every which to note promissory a signing were they Independence, of Declaration the and Constitution the of words magnificent the wrote republic our of architects the When check. a cash to capital nation's our to come have we sense a In
children. God's of all for reality a justice make to time the is Now brotherhood. of rock solid the to injustice racial of sands quick the from nation our lift to time the is Now justice. racial of path sunlit the to segregation of valley desolate and dark the from rise to time the is Now democracy. of promises the real make to time the is Now gradualism. of drug tranquilizing the take to or off cooling of luxury the in engage to time no is This now. of urgency fierce the of America remind to spot hallowed this to come also have We justice. of security the and freedom of riches the demand upon us give will that check a -- check this cash to come have we So nation. this of opportunity of vaults great the in funds insufficient are there that believe to refuse We bankrupt. is justice of bank the that believe to refuse we But funds." "insufficient marked back come has which check a check, bad a people Negro the given has America obligation, sacred this honoring of Instead concerned. are color of citizens her as insofar note promissory this on defaulted has America that today obvious is It

emerges. justice of day bright the until nation our of foundations the shake to continue will revolt of whirlwinds The rights. citizenship his granted is Negro the until America in tranquility nor rest neither be will There usual. as business to returns nation the if awakening rude a have will content be now will and steam off blow to needed Negro the that hope who Those beginning. a but end, an not is sixty-three Nineteen equality. and freedom of autumn invigorating an is there until pass not will discontent legitimate Negro's the of summer sweltering This moment. the of urgency the overlook to nation the for fatal be would It
hatred. and bitterness of cup the from drinking by freedom for thirst our satisfy to seek not us Let deeds. wrongful of guilty be not must we place rightful our gaining of process the In justice. of palace the into leads which threshold warm the on stand who people my to say must I that something is there But
alone. walk cannot We freedom. our to bound inextricably is freedom their that realize to come have They destiny. our with up tied is destiny their that realize to come have today, here presence their by evidenced as brothers, white our of many for people, white all of distrust a to us lead not must community Negro the engulfed has which militancy new marvelous The force. soul with force physical meeting of heights majestic the to rise must we again and Again violence. physical into degenerate to protest creative our allow not must We discipline. and dignity of plane high the on struggle our conduct forever must We
stream. mighty a like righteousness and waters like down rolls justice until satisfied be not will we and satisfied, not are we no, No, vote. to which for nothing has he believes York New in Negro a and vote cannot Mississippi in Negro a as long as satisfied be cannot We Only". Whites "For stating signs by dignity their of robbed and selfhood their of stripped are children our as long as satisfied be never can We one. larger a to ghetto smaller a from is mobility basic Negro's the as long as satisfied be cannot We cities. the of hotels the and highways the of motels the in lodging gain cannot travel, of fatigue the with heavy bodies, our as long as satisfied, be never can We brutality. police of horrors unspeakable the of victim the is Negro the as long as satisfied be never can We satisfied?" be you will "When rights, civil of devotees the asking are who those are There back. turn cannot We ahead. march always shall we that pledge the make must we walk, we As
redemptive. is suffering unearned that faith the with work to Continue suffering. creative of veterans the been have You brutality. police of winds the by staggered and persecution of storms the by battered you left freedom for quest your where areas from come have you of Some cells. jail narrow from fresh come have you of Some tribulations. and trials great of out here come have you of some that unmindful not am I
despair. of valley the in wallow not us Let changed. be will and can situation this somehow that knowing cities, northern our of ghettos and slums the to back go Louisiana, to back go Georgia, to back go Carolina, South to back go Alabama, to back go Mississippi, to back Go
dream. American the in rooted deeply dream a is It dream. a have still I tomorrow, and today of difficulties the face we though even so friends, my today, you to say I
equal." created are men all that self-evident: be to truths these hold "We creed: its of meaning true the out live and up rise will nation this day one that dream a have I
brotherhood. of table the at together down sit to able be will owners slave former of sons the and slaves former of sons the Georgia of hills red the on day one that dream a have I
justice. and freedom of oasis an into transformed be will oppression, of heat the with sweltering injustice, of heat the with sweltering state a Mississippi, of state the even day one that dream a have I
character. their of content the by but skin their of color the by judged be not will they where nation a in live day one will children little four my that dream a have I
today. dream a have I
brothers. and sisters as girls white and boys white little with hands join to able be will girls black and boys black little Alabama, in there right day one nullification; and interposition of words the with dripping lips his having governor its with racists, vicious its with Alabama, in down day, one that dream a have I
today. dream a have I
together. it see shall flesh all and revealed, be shall Lord the of glory the and straight, made be will places crooked the and plain, made be will places rough the low, made be shall mountain and hill every exalted, be shall valley every day one that dream a have I
day. one free be will we that knowing together, freedom for up stand to together, jail to go to together, struggle to together, pray to together, work to able be will we faith this With brotherhood. of symphony beautiful a into nation our of discords jangling the transform to able be will we faith this With hope. of stone a despair of mountain the of out hew to able be will we faith this With with. South the to back go I that faith the is This hope. our is This
ring." freedom let mountainside, every from pride, pilgrim's the of land died, fathers my where Land sing. I thee of liberty, of land sweet thee, of 'tis country, "My meaning, new a with sing to able be will children God's of all when day the be will This
Pennsylvania! of Alleghenies heightening the from ring freedom Let York. New of mountains mighty the from ring freedom Let Hampshire. New of hilltops prodigious the from ring freedom let So true. become must this nation great a be to is America if And
Colorado! of Rockies snowcapped the from ring freedom Let
California! of slopes curvaceous the from ring freedom Let
Georgia! of Mountain Stone from ring freedom let that; only not But
Tennessee! of Mountain Lookout from ring freedom Let
ring. freedom let mountainside, every From Mississippi. of molehill and hill every from ring freedom Let
last!" at free are we Almighty, God thank last! at free last! at "Free spiritual, Negro old the of words the in sing and hands join to able be will Catholics, and Protestants Gentiles, and Jews men, white and men black children, God's of all when day that up speed to able be will we city, every and state every from hamlet, every and village every from ring it let we when ring, to freedom allow we when happens, this when And

Americans: fellow my Congress, of Members President, Vice Mr. Speaker, Mr.

decades. three than more in level highest its to rate graduation America’s lift to part her did and it, needed who student a with time extra spent teacher a America, in Today

 years. four past the over created have businesses our jobs new million eight than more the to add to part her did and startup, tech her in lights the on flipped entrepreneur An

oil. foreign off itself wean America help to part his did and world, the in cars fuel-efficient most best, the of some fine-tuned autoworker An

end. an to coming finally is years, long twelve after that, war a from home being for thanks give and comrades, fallen remember spouse, their around arm an put kids, their in tuck will mothers and fathers America, across communities tight-knit in And  son. his for dreams big dreaming but bone-tired shift, graveyard the from home bus the took man A  afford. could mother his that asthma treat to prescription first the child young a gave doctor rural A  history. our in exports farm of stretch five-year strongest the after spring the for prepared farmer A

strong. union our of state the make who citizens, our you, is it represent: we people the to voice one with speaks chamber this Tonight,

is. America invest; to place one number world’s the longer no is China that declared have world the around leaders business decade, a over in time first the for And  half. than more by cut – deficits Our  years. twenty nearly in happened that’s time first the – world the of rest the from buy we than home at produced oil More  1990s. the since time first the for jobs adding that’s sector manufacturing A  market. housing rebounding A  years. five over in rate unemployment lowest The  efforts: your of results the are Here

Earth. on nation other any than century 21st the for better-positioned is States United the effort, determined and grit of years five After  America. for year breakthrough a be can this believe I why That’s

people. American the by right doing not are we then – States United the of credit and faith full the threaten or government down shut differences our when – democracy our of functions basic most the even out carrying from us prevents debate that when But  founding. very our to back dates that one – debate important an It’s  government. federal the of size proper the over argument rancorous a by consumed been has town this now, years several For  progress. this hinder or help to going are we whether is year, this make we decision every through running chamber, this in everyone for question The

crises. new creating not jobs, new creating on focus to freer us leave should compromise budget the But  way. balanced a in deficit our down bringing while future country’s this in invest to more do still can we and wanted, they everything got Nobody  education. like priorities to cuts severe year’s last of some undoes that budget a produced finally Congress this Republicans, and Democrats of work the to thanks month, Last  too. are, you of most believe I  here. us sent who people the of trust the rebuilding and better, work Washington making to committed I’m President, As

ahead. get can you responsibility, take and hard work you if that notion the – all for opportunity in belief profound simple, the is poor, or rich old, or young party, or region or race of regardless nation, this of people the unites believe I what And  aspirations. their hopes, their lives, their on focus to chamber this in us of all for – want Americans most what That’s  action. of year a this make Let’s  together. progress make can we else where see let’s months, coming the In

on. depend families that foundations economic the weakened and jobs, middle-class good, of lot a eliminated had competition global and technology in shifts massive hit, Recession Great the before even decades, three than more Over  blows. serious some suffered has belief that it: face Let’s

all. at working aren’t still many too And  ahead. get alone let – by get to just ever than more working are Americans many too recovery, of midst the in even that is fact hard cold, The  stalled. has mobility Upward  deepened. has Inequality  budged. barely have wages average But  better. done never have top the at those and higher, been rarely have prices stock and profits corporate growth, economic of years four after Today,

 do. to going I’m what that’s families, American more for opportunity expand to legislation without steps take can I whenever and wherever So  I. will neither and – still stand not does America But  you. of all with work to eager I’m and action, Congressional require Some  class. middle the into opportunity of ladders new build and class, middle the strengthen growth, up speed to proposals practical concrete, of set a is tonight offer I what But  everything. on agree won’t we and away, right happen won’t It  trends. these reverse to is job Our

equality. marriage to homelessness from issues on legislatures state and governors, mayors, with partnering we’re country, the Across  campus. to get they when succeed and college to go kid hardworking every help and – education higher to access in inequality reduce to commitments concrete made have nonprofits and businesses, universities, 150 already, where Summit Opportunity College a organized just House White the playbook, that from page a Taking  spouses. military and veterans 400,000 nearly train or hire to employers encouraged already has launched Biden Jill and Michelle that alliance Forces Joining The  come. to decades for costs care health reduce and lives improve will that achievement an – years thirty in time first the for rates obesity childhood down bring helped has leaders local and businesses, schools, with partnership Move Let’s Michelle’s  example. good a sets Lady First our usual, As

 Earth. on nation greatest the of President be can mom single a of son the how House; the of Speaker is barkeeper a of son the how automaker; largest America’s of CEO is worker factory a of daughter the how It’s  here. forebears our drew what That’s  dreams. our of scope the and ethic work our of strength the but birth, of accident on not depend should success our America, in here that believe, I and believe, They  forward. country this moving are and arguments, political stale of tired are who Washington outside Americans of millions are there is, point The

promise. that restore to is generation our of project defining the And  are. we who is Opportunity

abroad. from jobs insourcing of thinking they’re say manufacturers big of half over And  year. this people more hire to intend they say companies speed, up picking economy the With  job. good a to access is opportunity of measure best the start: to where know We

home. at here jobs create that businesses for rates tax lower and overseas, jobs ship to incentives those end loopholes, those close to together work Let’s  equation. that flip Let’s  abroad. profits keep that companies reward and here, investing businesses punish that loopholes complicated wasteful, with riddled is code tax our that argued have Republicans and Democrats Both  companies. more for easier decision that make let’s So

possible. as fast as job the on workers construction more get can we so projects, key for process permitting the streamline and bureaucracy slash to own my on act will I But  summer. this bills waterways and transportation finishing by jobs million three than more protect to Congress need We’ll  infrastructure. first-class to gravitate jobs first-class economy, global today’s in because – commutes our unclogging ports, our upgrading roads, our rebuilding jobs create to reform tax to transition this with save we money the take can we Moreover,

work. to back Americans more put and desk my to bills those get So  create. they jobs the and hubs these of number the double could houses both in bills Bipartisan  year. this more six launch we’ll announcing I’m Tonight,  technologies. advanced in world the lead America help can that universities research to businesses connected we’ve where Youngstown, and Raleigh in manufacturing high-tech for hubs two launched has administration My  jobs. manufacturing high-tech of wave next the for race the in countries other beat to now, right chance, the have also We

we. should Neither  sidelines. the on standing aren’t Europe and China  USA.” the in “Made stamped goods new to markets new open and environment, our protect workers, our protect to authority promotion trade bipartisan like tools on together work to need We  jobs. more create them help will Asia-Pacific the and Europe with partnerships trade new businesses, small are exporters our of percent ninety-eight when And  other. any than owners business small to loans more made has administration my years, five past the Over  America. in jobs new most create who owners business small and entrepreneurs the help to more do Let’s

litigation. needless costly, not innovation, on focused stay to businesses our allows that bill reform patent a pass let’s And  steel. than stronger that’s material paper-thin or bacteria, drug-resistant of ahead stay that vaccines it’s whether – discovery American great next the unleash can we so research basic to cuts year’s last by done damage the undo should Congress why That’s  smartphones. and Google behind inventions and ideas the to lead helped research Federally-funded  surrender. cannot America edge an is This  tomorrow. economy global the own will today innovation on all-in goes that nation the that know We

decades. in been we’ve than independence energy to closer is America today, and working, is ago years few a announced I strategy energy all-of-the-above The  energy. American to commitment our is back jobs more bringing in factors biggest the of one Now,

generations. future for lands federal pristine our of more protect to authority my use I’ll it, at we’re while And  communities. our and water, our air, our of protection strengthening while growth job and production sustain to industry the with working keep will administration My  gas. natural American to oil foreign from trucks and cars more shift that stations fueling building work to people putting by help can Congress this and built, factories those get states help to tape red cut I’ll  gas. natural use that factories new in billion $100 almost invest to plan Businesses  change. climate causes that pollution carbon the of less with economy our power can that fuel bridge the it’s safely, extracted if – gas natural is why reasons the of One

do. that future the of fuels in more invest can we that so it, need don’t that industries fuel fossil to year a billion $4 giving stops that policy tax smarter a with progress that continue Let’s  outsourced. be can’t job whose worker a by place into pounded panel every solar; goes business or home American another minutes, four Every  too. solar, in leader global a becoming we’re booming; that’s production gas natural and oil just not It’s

pump. the at pay we what and imports oil down driving keep can we so trucks, our for standards new setting by success that on build I’ll months, coming the In  cars. our for standards efficiency fuel higher set to them with worked we example, for automakers, our rescued we When  consume. we energy the reduce to communities local and builders, businesses, with partnered we’ve production, energy increased we’ve as even And

did. we yes, say to able be to us want I energy, of sources new with world, stable more safer, a them leave to could we all did we if ask and eye the in us look children children’s our when And  fact. a is change Climate  settled. is debate the But  way. the along choices tough require will it and overnight, happen won’t economy energy cleaner a to shift The  air. the into dump to allowed are plants power our pollution carbon of amount the on standards new set to others and utilities, states, with work to administration my directed I why That’s  floods. with dealing cities coastal and drought, with struggling communities western harming already is climate changing a because – urgency more with act to have we But  Earth. on nation other any than more pollution carbon total our reduced has States United the years, eight past the Over  planet. safer cleaner, a to leading and jobs creating is policy energy our together, Taken

year. this done reform immigration get let’s So  everyone. for jobs create and locate to businesses for place attractive more a country our make they – culture our to contribute and invent, study, to – dreams their fulfill to here come people when reason: good for And  decades. two next the in trillion $1 almost by deficits our shrink and economy our grow will reform immigration say economists Independent  same. the do to want House the in parties both of members that know I  acted. have Senate the in Democrats and Republicans  system. immigration broken our fix and – enforcement law and leaders, faith leaders, labor leaders, business of call the heed to time is it growth, economic about serious are we if Finally,

jobs. those fill to skills the has American every that sure make to have we economy, rapidly-changing this in But  jobs. more create and growth up speed can far so outlined I’ve ideas The

employees. 700 than more has Systems Manufacturing Detroit today, And  workers. new with flooded was She  job. better or job, new a find to need they training or help the get to in walk can folks where places – Center Job American an call we what up dialed she So  workforce. the needed just She  them. make to how knew she and America, in truck best-selling the for parts needed Ford that knew She  Detroit. in firm manufacturing a up opened Rush Andra back, roaring came industry auto the as ago, years Two  it. do to how know we is, news good The

jobs. ready-to-be-filled with Americans ready-to-work more connect that programs proven on funding concentrate can you help, to wants Congress if And  needs. specific their fill to training design help can that colleges community to companies connecting means It  life. for trajectory upward an on worker young a set that apprenticeships more and training, on-the-job more means That  now. right filled be to need that jobs good to them match and need, employers skills the with Americans train mission: one have they sure make to programs training America’s of reform across-the-board an lead to Biden President Vice asked I’ve tonight, So  seeker. job every and – employer every for be should it how is experienced employees her and Andra What

people. million 1.6 for expire let just you insurance unemployment the restore to needs Congress this first, But  economy. today’s in effective more it’s that so insurance unemployment reforming by faster workforce the to return Americans help can we convinced also I’m

why. you tell me Let

chance.” this us give Please  love. we community the in home own their in children our raise will we and taxes, my pay will job…I a find will I time in that confident am neighbors…I our about society…care to contribute careers, build who us like people on depends country government…Our the on dependent not am “I  wrote. she crisis,” unemployment the of face the are “We  day. every get I kind the – letter a me wrote and down sat she off, cut was insurance unemployment their when month, Last  loved. she job the claimed cuts budget later, week A  home. first their buy to savings life their used husband her and she May, In  benefits. unemployment collected never She’d  college. through herself put She  teenager. a was she since employed steadily been She’d boys. young two of mother a is DeMars Misty

 team. full a fields America when stronger are we because – same the do to and us join to America in leader business every ask I Tonight,  real. commitment that make to House White the to come will many week, this families; their support to chance new and job new that at shot fair a workers unemployed long-term more give to CEOs asking been I’ve why That’s  game. the in them needs country this important, more but help, our need They  chance. that Americans responsible hardworking, these give Congress,

education. world-class a to access child every guaranteeing by workforce, tomorrow’s prepare to have also We  workforce. today’s train to enough not it’s course, Of

fall. this college to going he’s out found just worker factory a of son this And  applications. college their off mailed they where office, post the to school high their from – neighbors and parents cheering of crowd a through – classmates his of march a led he program, tutoring innovative an and teachers great of support the to thanks month, last But  nine. age at City York New to moved he when English of word a speak couldn’t Rodriguez Estiven

 working. it’s and – it worth it’s But  test. a on bubble a in fill can they well how not think, kids our well how measure to ways new and teachers for support better to parents demanding more and curriculums challenging more from everything requires It  hard. is change this of Some  math. and engineering, technology, science, thinking, critical solving, problem – economy new the for skills with students preparing in strides big making are D.C. Washington, to Tennessee from schools in principals and Teachers  performance. and expectations raise states helped has parties, both from governors of help the with Top, the to Race  before. ever than degrees college earning are people young more today, and loans, student reform to lenders with worked We  kids. our all for odds the change to out set we ago, years Five

 change. to has That  time. in them reaching not we’re and kids, enough reaching not still we’re is problem The

need. they pre-K high-quality the access kids more help to willing philanthropists and leaders, business officials, elected of coalition a together pull to going I’m do, to going it’s what decides Congress as And  children. youngest our for top the to race a in country the across communities and states with partnerships new in invest we’ll year, this schools, our reform to states with worked we as just So  wait. can’t we know They  own. their on funding pre-k raised have states thirty meantime, the in But tonight. request that repeat I President, a as well as parent a As  year-old. four every to available pre-K high-quality make states help to Congress this asked I year, Last  education. early high-quality is life child’s a in make can we investments best the of one that shows Research

 deficit. the to dime a adding without years, two next the over students million twenty and schools 15,000 than more connecting start to payment down a got we’ve Verizon, and Sprint, Microsoft, Apple, like companies and FCC the of support the with that announce can I Tonight,  years. four next the over broadband high-speed to students our of percent 99 connect to pledged also I year, Last

potential. full their reach and track on stay odds tough facing color of men young more help to initiative new a on corporations and foundations leading America’s of some to out reaching I’m And  debt. loan student by trapped feel who Americans more even help can we how see to Congress with work to want I and income, their of percent ten to payments loan student monthly their cap to opportunity the millions offering We’re  education. college a of out priced is kid middle-class no that so value, better offer to incentives more colleges and information, more parents give to education higher of system our up shaking We’re  career. and job a to directly lead can that training hands-on and education real-world the offer that employers and colleges with them partner and schools high redesign to working We’re

 American. single every for off pays work hard and work, of dignity the honors economy our sure make to more do we unless – promise empty an as Dream American the see will today workforce the entering people young many too and – complete be won’t agenda opportunity our know we But  us. gave country this chance same the have to child every want I and Michelle is, line bottom The

succeeds. America succeed, women when believe firmly I Because  deserves. she opportunity the woman every give to – Street Main to Street Wall from businesses and House, White the Congress, – together come all let’s year, This  episode. Men” “Mad a in belong that policies workplace with away do to time It’s  too. does, father a what, know you and – hardship into running without parent sick or child sick a for care to off day a deserves mother A  job. her sacrificing without baby a have to deserves She  work. equal for pay equal deserves woman A embarrassment. an it’s 2014, in and wrong, is That  earns. man a dollar every for cents 77 make still they But  workforce. our half about up make women Today,

poverty. in family a raise to have ever should time full works who one no that agree overwhelmingly Americans But  success. incredible achieve efforts, their of virtue by who, those resent don’t we and others, than more earn will people some that understand Americans  wages. stagnant by stifled ones only the not they’re but – jobs lower-wage of majority a hold women Now,

morale. their boosted and stress financial their eased that decision a – hour an bucks ten to raise, a employees his gave just John it: of more makes he now Only  dough. the make helps Nick and Minneapolis, in Pizza Punch of owner an John’s  Soranno. John boss, his with tonight here is Chute Nick  own. their on it done have businesses Many  theirs. raise to laws passed have states five wage, minimum the raise to Congress this asked I since year the In

poverty. in live to have shouldn’t you dishes, their wash or meals troops’ our cook you if because – hour an $10.10 least at of wage fair a employees federally-funded their pay to contractors federal requiring Order Executive an issue will I weeks, coming the In  too. should We turnover. reduce and productivity boost to way smart the as wages higher see Costco like corporations Profitable example. by lead to intend I executive, chief a as And  on. this take you if you support will Americans act; to Congress for wait to have don’t you say, I America, in legislator state and governor, mayor, every To  wages. employees’ your raise to can you what do and lead John’s follow to leaders business America’s of more ask I Tonight,

raise. a America Give  yes. Say  country. the of rest the join So  program. bureaucratic new any involve doesn’t It  spend. to money more with customers businesses give will It  families. help will This  $10.10. to wage minimum the lifting by that fix to bill a have Miller George and Harkin Tom  here. stood first Reagan Ronald when was it than less percent twenty about worth is wage minimum federal the Today, board. on get to needs Congress more, millions reach to course, Of

ahead. get Americans more help and work, reward credit, the strengthen to together work let’s So  kids. have don’t who workers single for enough do doesn’t it that Rubio Senator like Republicans with agree I But  point. some at parents all of half about helps it now, Right  Credit. Tax Income Earned the than work hard through up themselves pull families helping and inequality reducing at effective more are few and meet, ends make families help to take can we steps other are There

Americans. of generations future for alive homeownership of dream the keeps and again, ever crisis housing a for bill the footing from taxpayers protects that legislation me send home, their is make families many investment important most the since And  can. chamber this in everyone like just work at save can they so job, the on IRA automatic an to access American every Offer  Americans. middle-class for nothing to little does but save, wealthy the help to breaks tax big gives that code tax upside-down an fix to me with work help, to wants Congress this if And  in. put you what losing of risk no with return decent a guarantees MyRA  egg. nest a build to folks encourages that bond savings new a It’s MyRA. savings: retirement own their start to Americans working for way new a create to Treasury the direct will I tomorrow, why, That’s  401ks. have don’t who folks help doesn’t that years, five last the over doubled has market stock the while And  own. its on enough isn’t often check Security Social A  pension. a have don’t workers most Today, retirement. for save Americans help to more do Let’s

that. fixing of process the in we’re heard, haven’t you case in And  system. care health broken a than more hardship economic to families hard-working exposed things few decades, For  security. financial on point last One

bankruptcy. meant would’ve surgery that said, Amanda earlier, week one Just  surgery. emergency had she 6th, January On  pain. sharp a felt she 3rd, January On  covered. got she 1st, January on But  insurance. health get couldn’t Arizona, from mom single and assistant physician a Shelley, Amanda like someone that mean to used condition pre-existing A

 everything. lose to have don’t you strikes, misfortune if that mind of peace the – about all is reform insurance health what That’s

plans. parents’ their under coverage gained have 26 age under Americans million three than more Act, Care Affordable the of because Already,

coverage. Medicaid or insurance health private for up signed have Americans million nine than More

seniors. of millions for costs prescription lowering and flat, premiums Medicare keeping finances, Medicare’s to years adding while this all did we And  woman. a she’s because just more charged be ever can woman No cancer. or pain, back asthma, like condition preexisting a for coverage denied or dropped be again ever can American no law, this of Because  zero. number: another here’s And

 against. we’re what just not for, we’re what say to people American the to it owe all We  it. got We  plenty. were forty first The  Amanda. like Americans of millions helping already that’s law a repeal to votes forty-something another have not let’s But  up. add numbers the if see Let’s  differently. do you’d what America tell – choice increase and people, more cover costs, cut to plans specific have you if again, So  battles. old refighting in interested aren’t people American the that know I But  law. this of merits the on friends Republican my convince to expect don’t I Now,

 way.” that live to deserves one No  sick. get don’t they praying morning every work to go who people are clerks…they tractors…grocery the on out with…farmers church to go and shop we people are “They  said. he neighbors,” and friends our are “They  families. commonwealth’s his covering to comes it when possessed man a like he’s but country, the of part liberal most the not Kentucky’s  tonight. here who’s Kentucky, of Beshear Steve Governor to talk just having, is law this impact real the know to want you if And

 you. from hearing appreciate she’ll plus, – mind of peace some her give will It  application. the through her walk and mom your call Kids,  up. sign to kids your on get Moms,  31st. March by covered get them help to insurance health without someone knows who American every ask I tonight, why, That’s  right. Steve’s

well. as dreams its pursue can generation next the sure make to family American one as together come still but dreams, individual our pursue can we responsibility, and work hard through that recognition the – citizenship of spirit the It’s  forward. nation this moved always has that spirit the that’s all, After

democracy. our drives that account, bank our of size the not vote, our of power the be should It  efforts. these support Let’s  vote. to hour half a than more wait to has one no that so reforms offered has year last appointed I commission bipartisan the and it; strengthen to together working are Democrats liberal and Republicans conservative But  weakened. was Act Rights Voting the of part year, Last  vote. to right everyone’s for up standing means Citizenship

Hook. Sandy like schools or malls, shopping theaters, movie our in Americans innocent visiting from tragedies more stop help to Congress, without or with trying, keep to intend I and afraid,” not are “we say who country this over all officers police and pastors, students, parents, of courage the seen have I  day. each us from steals violence gun that lives the for up standing means Citizenship

Forces. Armed States United the of women and men the and diplomats our than country their to more give Americans few that agrees chamber this know I And  communities. our to serve to obligation an self-government; of work hard the in participation cause; common of sense a demands Citizenship

over. be finally will war longest America’s and year, this of end the by there mission our complete will we allies, our with Together role. support a to moved have troops our security, own their for lead the in now forces Afghan With  Afghanistan. from home come already have troops our of 60,000 than More  Iraq. of out are troops our all Today,  Afghanistan. and Iraq in serving were Americans 180,000 nearly office, took I When  secure. more is States United the free, us keep to lives their down lay and risk who civilians and troops extraordinary the of because Tonight,

country. our against attacks launch not do terrorists that resolve our not: will thing one change, will Afghanistan with relationship our while For  Qaeda. al of remnants any pursue to operations counterterrorism and forces, Afghan assisting and training missions: narrow two out carry to allies NATO with Afghanistan in remain could Americans of force small a negotiated, have we that agreement security a signs government Afghan the If  future. own its for responsibility takes it as Afghanistan unified a support will we 2014, After

missions. future in succeed to need they capabilities the in invest and uniform, in women and men our with faith keep to have we budget, defense our reform we as And  cyberattacks. like threats new combat and defenses, our strengthening keep we’ll home, at Here networks. terrorist of agenda the  rejects that opposition the support we’ll Syria, In networks. these disable and disrupt to partners with working keep to have we Mali, and Iraq, Somalia, Yemen, In world. the of parts different in root take extremists other and affiliates Qaeda al as evolved, has threat the defeat, to path a on leadership core Qaeda’s al put have we While  remains. danger that is, fact The

extremism. feed ultimately may and strength our drain that deployments large-scale – us from prefer terrorists that those not fought, be to need that battles the fight must We  conflicts. open-ended in mired be to daughters and sons our allow I will nor necessary; truly it’s unless way harm’s into troops our send not will I But  office. this hold I as long as so do to hesitate never will I and people, American the protect to needed when force used have I Commander-in-Chief, As alone. military our on depend cannot security our and leadership our believe strongly I But  vigilant. remain to have We

world. the of rest the for example an setting and ideals, Constitutional our to true remaining by but action, military and intelligence through just not terrorism counter we because – Bay Guantanamo at prison the close we and transfers detainee on restrictions remaining the lifts Congress year the be to needs this ending, war Afghan the with And  violated. being not is people ordinary of privacy the that abroad, and here confidence, public on depends community intelligence our of work vital the because – programs surveillance our reform will I Congress, this with working why, That’s  consequence. the for regard without countries their within strike we believe abroad people if safer be not will we for – drones of use the on limits prudent imposed I’ve why That’s  footing. war permanent a off move must America – partners foreign our of capacity the building by and efforts targeted more through – networks terrorist pursue aggressively we as even So,

side. their at be always will America knows that state Jewish a – Israel of State the for security and peace lasting and Palestinians, for state independent an and dignity achieve to there; conflict the end to talks necessary but difficult in engage they as Palestinians and Israelis supporting is diplomacy American speak, we As fear. and terror dictatorship, of free future a – deserve people Syrian the future the in usher to community international the with work to continue will we and eliminated, being are weapons chemical Syria’s why is force, of threat the by backed diplomacy, American  stockpiles. War Cold on reliance own our reduce to us allowed and hands, wrong the into falling from materials nuclear prevent to countries fifty than more rallied has diplomacy American  diplomacy. principled and strong including – power our of elements all on depends leadership and security our threats, complex of world a in see, You

weapon. nuclear a obtaining from Iran preventing share: all we goal a achieve peacefully can we if see to negotiations in engaged we’re partners, and allies our with And  bomb. a building not is Iran that day, every verify, world the help inspections Unprecedented  centrifuges. advanced installing not is It  uranium. enriched of levels higher of stockpile its eliminate to begun has Iran tonight, here gather we As  decade. a in time first very the for – back program that of parts rolled and – program nuclear Iran’s of progress the halted has that pressure, by backed diplomacy, American is it And

today. adversaries powerful less with negotiate can America confident and strong a surely then Union, Soviet the with negotiate could Reagan Ronald and Kennedy F. John If  bomb. nuclear a building not is Iran that community international the and us convinces that action verifiable on based be must to agree we deal long-term any trust; on rely not do negotiations these But  away. wished be cannot nations our between mistrust the and allies; our threaten which Hezbollah, like organizations terrorist for support Iran’s about clear-eyed are We  succeed. not may They  difficult. be will negotiations These

war. of risks the without time our of challenges security leading the of one resolved have will we and nations, of community the rejoin to step important an take could Iran then chance, the seize do leaders Iran’s if But  weapon. nuclear a build not does Iran sure make to options all exercise to ready stand and sanctions, more for call to first the be will I then opportunity, this seize not do leaders Iran’s If  succeed. to chance a diplomacy give must we security, national our of sake the For  it. veto will I talks, these derail to threatens that now bill sanctions new a me sends Congress this if clear: be me let But  possible. opportunity this make helped place in put we that sanctions The

 America. than opportunities those of advantage take to positioned better is one no And  want. and fear from people free to markets, new expand to cooperation, greater forge to – globe the around understanding promote and good do to opportunities enormous the by but threats, against defense our by just not defined is leadership our that remember let’s Finally,

America!” bless “God and kindness” your forget never will “We like, words with greeted were and typhoon, a by battered those aid to rushed civilians and Marines our when Philippines, the in did we as – disaster by devastated those to hand a extend and prosperity, and security greater of future a shape allies, our support we where Asia-Pacific, the on focus to continue will we And  people. young among exchanges educational and cultural expanding also we’re but commerce, of ties new building are we Americas, the In  poverty. extreme end help and electricity to access double to governments and businesses together bringing we’re Africa, Across  future. country’s their in say a have and peacefully, and freely themselves express to right the have people all that principle the for stand we Ukraine, In  democracy. building of work hard the do to willing are who those supporting we’re Burma, to Tunisia From  known. ever has world the strongest the remains Europe with alliance Our

gold. the home brings and – Stadium Olympic the into blue and white, red, the marches USA Team when – commitment that of expression one see will world the week, next And  orientation. sexual or creed religion, or race of regardless being, human every of equality and dignity inherent the in believe we because them do we And  security. long-term our promote help they because things these do We

them. advance to bear we burdens the and for, stand we ideals the of because but – might military our or economy our of size the of because simply not us, to turns world the issue, every On  do. we what does world the in country other no Americans, fellow My

families. military remarkable our support and honor to forces join to continue all we And  home. at here jobs into leadership and skills their translate veterans our all help to working keep We’ll  need. they that – care health mental the including – care health the receive warriors wounded our and earned, they’ve benefits the receive veterans our so backlog that slashing keep We’ll  life. civilian to returns heroes of generation new a close, a to draws war of time this As  uniform. in serve who those than better this knows one No

know. to come I’ve families those of one about you tell me Let

touch. in stay to him told I and pictures, took and around, joked We  tack. a as sharp manner, easy an with man, young impressive strong, a – program the through me walked he Rangers, fellow his of some with Along  D-Day. of anniversary 65th the on Beach Omaha at Ranger, Army proud a Remsburg, Cory met first I

 brain. his in shrapnel underwater, down, face canal, a in him found comrades His Afghanistan. in bomb roadside massive a by killed nearly was Cory deployment, tenth his on later, months few A

 day. every rehab grueling of hours and procedures, and surgeries of dozens endured he’s years, the Over  move. barely could he speak; couldn’t he hospital, the in him, met I time next The  coma. a in lay he months, For

 again. country his serve can he when day the toward working he’s and – again walk and again stand and again speak to learned he’s day, by Day stronger. grown has Cory him, around community the and Craig, dad his like caregivers of support the with steadily, slowly, But  side. left his on struggles still He  eye. one in blind still is Cory now, Even

 easy.” is anything worth that’s life in “Nothing says. he easy,” been not has recovery “My

 quit. not does he and up, gives never Remsburg Cory Class First Sergeant serves, he America the like loves, he Army the like And  tonight. here is Cory

 reach. our within it’s know I – tomorrow towards cast eyes our but today in firmly planted feet our with us, in best is what summon we if together; work we if But  easy. is it of none – us take will toil and dreams our as far as go us lets all for opportunity and shared widely is prosperity where strong; are communities and plentiful is work honest where America rising a – kids our for want we America The  citizen. every for real made are founders our by paper to set words the that so law, the under equality and fairness, and justice, promote to fear; and tyranny from nations other free to achievement; individual of possibilities the expand and build and create to – progress of wheel the to shoulder collective our placed and aside things those put have we years, hundred two than more for But  discouraged. or frustrated get we mistakes; make we stumble; we Sometimes  easy. been never has democracy, our freedom, Our  easy. come never has America that us remind Cory like women and men Americans, fellow My

it. Believe

America. of States United the bless God and you, bless God

much. so you Thank (Applause.) you. Thank you. Thank much. so you Thank (Applause.) you. Thank OBAMA: PRESIDENT

decades. three than more in levels highest its to rate graduation America's lift to part her did and it needed who student a with time extra spent teacher a America, in today Americans, fellow my Congress, of members President, Vice Mr. Speaker, Mr.

(Applause.) years. four past the over created have businesses our jobs new million 8 than more the to add to part her did and startup tech her in lights the on flipped entrepreneur An

oil. foreign off itself wean America help to part his did and world the in cars fuel-efficient most best, the of some fine-tuned autoworker An

history. our in exports farm of stretch five-year strongest the after spring the for prepared farmer A

(Applause.) end. an to coming finally is years long twelve after that war a from home being for thanks give and comrades fallen remember spouse, their around arm an put kids, their in tuck will mothers and fathers America, across all communities tight-knit in And son. his for dreams big dreaming but bone-tired shift, graveyard the from home bus the took man A (Applause.) afford. could mother his that asthma treat to prescription first the child young a gave doctor rural A

speech) Obama’s on thoughts Five Fix: (The

(Applause.) strong. union our of state the make who citizens, our you, is It represent: we people the to voice one with speaks chamber this Tonight

is. America invest; to place one number world's the longer no is China that declared have world the around leaders business decade, a over in time first the for -- (applause) -- time first the for and half; than more by cut deficits our -- (applause) -- years twenty nearly in happened that's time first the world, the of rest the from buy we than home at produced oil more -- produced oil more -- (applause) -- 1990s the since time first the for jobs adding that's sector manufacturing a -- (applause) -- market housing rebounding a years; five over in rate unemployment lowest the efforts: your of results the are here And

Earth. on nation other any than century 21st the for better-positioned is States United the effort, determined and grit of years five After America. for year breakthrough a be can this believe I why That's applause.) (Cheers,

applause.) (Cheers, people. American the by right doing not are we then -- States United the of credit and faith full the threaten or government down shut differences our when -- democracy our of functions basic most the even out carrying from us prevents debate that when But founding. very our to back dates that one -- debate important an It's government. federal the of size proper the over argument rancorous a by consumed been has town this now, years several For progress. this hinder or help to going are we whether is year, this make we decision every through running chamber, this in everyone for question The

address) Union the of State the (Fact-checking

way. balanced a in deficit our down bringing while future country's this in invest to more do still can we and wanted, they everything got Nobody education. like priorities to cuts severe year's last of some undoes that budget a produced finally Republicans,Congress and Democrats of work the to thanks month, Last too. are, you of most believe I And here. us sent who people the of trust the rebuilding and better, work Washington making to committed I'm president, as Now,

crises. new creating not jobs, new creating on focus to freer us leave should compromise budget the But

(Applause.) America. in ahead get can you responsibility, take and hard work you if that notion the all, for opportunity in belief profound simple, the is poor, or rich old, or young party, or region or race of regardless nation, this of people the unites believe I what And aspirations. their hopes, their lives, their on focus to chamber this in us of all for want, Americans most what That's action. of year a this make Let's together. progress make can we else where see let's months, coming the in -- (applause) -- months coming the in And

on. depend families that foundations economic the weakened and jobs, middle-class good, of lot a eliminated had competition global and technology in shifts massive hit, Recession Great the before even decades, three than more Over blows. serious some suffered has belief That it: face let's Now,

all. at working aren't still many too And ahead. get to alone let by; get to just ever than more working are Americans many too recovery, of midst the in even that is fact hard cold, The stalled. has mobility Upward deepened. has Inequality budged. barely have wages average But better. done never have top the at those and higher, been rarely have prices stock and profits corporate growth, economic of years four after Today,

trends. these reverse to is job our So

everything. on agree won't we and away, right happen won't It

Congress) bypass to prepared Obama (Analysis:

applause.) (Cheers, do. to going I'm what that's families, American more for opportunity expand to legislation without steps take can I whenever and wherever So (Applause.) I. will neither and still, stand not does America But you. of all with work to eager I'm and action, congressional require Some class. middle the into opportunity of ladders new build and class middle the strengthen growth, up speed to proposals practical concrete, of set a is tonight offer I what But

(Applause.) spouses. military and veterans 400,000 nearly train or hire to employers encouraged already has launched Biden Jill and Michelle that alliance Forces Joining The come. to decades for costs care health reduce and lives improve will that -- (applause) -- achievement an that's and years, thirty in time first the for rates obesity childhood down bring helped has leaders local businesses, schools, with partnership Move! Let's Michelle's Yeah. applause.) (Cheers, (Chuckles.) well. -- (applause) -- Michelle's example. good a sets lady first our usual, As

campus. to get they when succeed and college to go kid hardworking every help to and education higher to access in inequality reduce to commitments concrete made have nonprofits businesses, universities, 150 already where Summit, Opportunity College a organized just House White the playbook, that from page a Taking

equality. marriage to homelessness from issues on legislatures state and governors mayors, with partnering we're -- (applause) -- country the across And

applause.) (Cheers, Earth. on nation greatest the of president be can mom single a of son the how -- applause) (cheers, -- House the of speaker is barkeep a of son the how -- (applause) -- automaker largest America's of CEO is worker factory a of daughter the how It's here. forebears our drew what That's dreams. our of scope the and ethic work our of strength the but birth of accident on not depend should success our America, in here that believe, I and believe, They forward. country this moving are and arguments political stale of tired are who Washington outside Americans of millions are there is, point The

promise. that restore to be must generation our of project defining the And are. we who is opportunity -- applause) and cheers (sustained -- Now

year. this people more hire to intend they say companies speed, up picking economy the With job. good a to access is opportunity of measure best The start. to where know We

(Applause.) abroad. from jobs insourcing of thinking they're say manufacturers big of half over And

applause.) (Cheers, home. at here right jobs create that businesses for rates tax lower and overseas, jobs ship to incentives those end loopholes, those close to together work Let's equation. that flip Let's abroad. profits keep that companies reward and here, investing businesses punish that loopholes complicated wasteful, with riddled is code tax our that argued have Republicans and Democrats Both companies. more for easier decision that make let's So

happen. can That applause.) (Cheers, summer. this bills waterways and transportation finishing by jobs million 3 than more protect to Congress need We'll infrastructure. first-class to gravitate jobs class first- economy, global today's in because -- commutes our unclogging ports, our upgrading roads, our rebuilding jobs create to reform tax to transition this from save we money the take can we Moreover,

(Applause.) possible. as fast as job the on workers construction more get can we so projects, key for process permitting the streamline and bureaucracy slash to own my on act I'll but -- But

technologies. advanced in world the lead America help can that universities research to businesses connected we've where Ohio, Youngstown, and Carolina, North Raleigh, in manufacturing high-tech for hubs two launched administration's my And jobs. manufacturing high-tech of wave next the for race the in countries other beat to now, right chance, the have also We

(Applause.) work. to back Americans more put and desk my to bills those get So, create. they jobs the and hubs these of number the double could houses both in bills Bipartisan year. this more six launch we'll announcing I'm Tonight,

(Applause.) USA." the in "Made stamped goods new to markets new open and environment our protect workers, our protect to authority promotion trade bipartisan like tools on together work to need We jobs. more even create them help will Asia-Pacific the and Europe with partnerships trade new businesses, small are exporters our of percent 98 when And other. any than owners business small to loans more made has administration my years, five past the Over America. in jobs new most create who owners business small and entrepreneurs the help to more do Let's

applause.) (Cheers, discovery. American great next the unleash can we so research basic to cuts year's last by done damage the undo should Congress why that's And smartphones. and Google behind inventions and ideas the to lead helped research Federally-funded surrender. cannot America edge an is This tomorrow. economy global the own will today innovation on all-in goes that nation the that know We we. should neither -- neither and sidelines; the on standing aren't Europe and China Listen,

(Applause.) litigation. needless and costly not innovation, on focused stay to businesses our allows that bill reform patent a pass let's And steel. than stronger that's material paper-thin or bacteria drug-resistant of ahead stay that vaccines on based built be to industries entire are There

(Applause.) decades. in been have we than independence energy to closer is America today and working, is ago years few a announced I strategy energy above" the "all The energy. American to commitment our is back jobs more bringing in factors biggest the of one Now,

(Applause.) gas. natural American to oil foreign from trucks and cars more shift that stations fueling building work to people putting by help can Congress this and work, to folks put and built factories those get states help to tape red cut I'll gas. natural use that factories new in dollars billion hundred a almost invest to plan Businesses (Applause.) change. climate causes that pollution carbon the of less with economy our power can that fuel bridge the it's safely, extracted If gas. natural is why reasons the of One

(Applause.) generations. future for lands federal pristine our of more protect to authority my use I'll it, at we're while And communities. our water, our air, our of protection strengthening while growth jobs and production sustain to industry the with working keep will administration my Meanwhile,

too. solar in leader global a becoming we're booming; that's production gas natural and oil just not it's Now,

applause.) (Cheers, do. that future the of fuels in more invest can we so it need don't that industries fuel fossil to year a billion $4 giving stops that policy tax smarter a with progress that continue Let's outsourced. be can't job whose worker a by place into pounded panel every solar, goes business or home American another minutes four Every

pump. the at pay we what and imports oil down driving keep can we so trucks our for standards new setting by success that on build I'll months coming the In cars. our for standards efficiency fuel higher set to them with worked we example, for automakers, our rescued we When consume. we energy the reduce to communities local and builders businesses, with partnered we've production, energy increased we've as even And

(Applause.) Earth. on nation other any than more pollution carbon total our reduced has States United the years eight past the Over planet. safer cleaner, a to leading and jobs creating is policy energy our together, taken And

air. the into dump to allowed are plants power our pollution carbon of amount the on standards new set to others and utilities states, with work to administration my directed I why That's floods. with dealing cities coastal and drought with struggling communities western harming already is climate changing a because urgency more with act to have we But

way. the along choices tough some require will it and overnight, happen won't economy energy cleaner a to shift the -- (applause) -- shift The

applause.) (Cheers, did. we yes, say to able be to us want I energy, of sources new with world, stable more safer, a them leave to could we all did we if ask and eye the in us look children children's our when And (Applause.) fact. a is change Climate settled. is debate the But

time. It's done. it get Let's applause.) (Cheers, year. this done reform immigration get let's So everybody. for jobs create and locate to businesses for place attractive more a country our make they -- culture our to contribute invent, study, to -- dreams their fulfill to here come people When reason: good for And decades. two next the in trillion $1 almost by deficits our shrink and economy our grow will reform immigration say economists Independent same. the do to want House the in parties both of members that know I and acted, have Senate the in Democrats and Republicans applause.) (Cheers, system. immigration broken our fix and -- enforcement law leaders, faith leaders, labor leaders, business of call the heed to time is it growth, economic about serious we're if Finally,

jobs. those fill to skills the has American every that sure make to have we economy, rapidly-changing this in But jobs. more create and growth up speed can far so outlined I've ideas The

seeker. job every and employer every for be should it how is experienced employees her and Andra what And employees. 700 than more has Systems Manufacturing Detroit today, and workers, new with flooded was She job. better a or job, new a find to need they training or help the get to in walk can folks where places Center; Job American an call we what up dialed she So workforce. the needed just She parts. those make to how knew she and America, in truck best-selling the for parts needed Ford that knew She Detroit. in firm manufacturing a up opened Rush Andra back, roaring came industry auto the as ago, years Two it. do to how know we is, news good The

jobs. ready-to-be-filled with Americans ready-to-work more connect that programs proven on funding concentrate can you help, to wants Congress if And needs. specific their fill to training design help can that colleges community to companies connecting means It life. for trajectory upward an on worker young a set that apprenticeships more and training, on-the-job more means That applause.) (Cheers, now. right filled be to need that jobs good to them match and need, employers skills the with Americans train mission: one have they sure make to programs training America's of reform the-board across- an lead to Biden President Vice asked I've tonight, So

applause.) (Cheers, people. million 1.6 for expire let just you insurance unemployment the restore to needs Congress this first, But economy. today's in effective more it's that so insurance unemployment reforming by faster workforce the to return Americans help can we convinced also I'm

why. you tell me Let

taxes. paying been she's but benefits, unemployment collected never She'd college. through herself put teenager, a was she since employed steadily been She'd boys. young two of mother a is DeMars Misty

chance." this us give Please love. we community the in home own their in children our raise will we and taxes, my pay will I job, a find will I time in that confident am I neighbors. our about care society, to contribute careers, build who us like people on depends country Our government. the on dependent not "I'm wrote. she crisis," unemployment the of face the are "We day. every get I kind the letter, a me wrote and down sat she off, cut was insurance unemployment their when month, Last loved. she job the claimed cuts budget later, week A home. first their buy to savings life their used husband her and she May, In

real. commitment that make to House White the to come will many week this fact, in And families. their support to chance new a jobs, new at shot fair a workers unemployed long-term more give to CEOs asking been I've why That's game. the in them needs country this important, more but now, right help our need They chance. the them Give chance. that them Give applause.) (Cheers, chance. that Americans responsible hardworking, these give Congress,

(Applause.) team. full a fields America when stronger are we because same the do and us join to America in leader business every ask I Tonight

(Applause.) education. world-class a to access child every guaranteeing by workforce, tomorrow's prepare to have also We workforce. today's train to enough not it's course, Of

(Applause.) fall. this college to going he's out found just worker factory a of son this And applications. college their off mailed they where office, post the to school high their from neighbors and parents cheering of crowd a through classmates his of march a led he program, tutoring innovative an and teachers great of support the to thanks month, last But 9. age at City York New to moved he when English of word a speak couldn't Rodriguez Estiven

math. engineering, technology, science, thinking, critical solving, problem -- economy new the for skills the with students preparing in strides big making are D.C., Washington, to Tennessee from schools in principals and Teachers performance. and expectations raise states helped has parties, both from governors of help the with Top, the to Race before. ever than degrees college earning are people young more today and loans, student reform to lenders with worked We kids. our all for odds the change to out set we ago years Five

hard. is change this of some Now,

working. is it and -- it worth is it But test. a on bubble a in fill can they well how not think, kids our well how measure to ways new and teachers for support better to parents demanding more and curriculums challenging more from everything requires It

change. to has that and time, in them reaching not we're and kids, enough reaching not still we're is problem The

tonight. request that repeat I president, a as well as parent a as And 4-year-old. every to available pre-K high-quality make states help to Congress this asked I year, Last (Applause.) education. early high-quality is life child's a in make can we investments best the of one that shows Research

done. this get to need We America. for right is It (Applause.) need. they that pre-K high-quality the access kids more help to willing philanthropists and leaders, business officials, elected of coalition a together pull to going I'm do, to going it's what decides Congress as And children. youngest our for top the to race a in country the across communities and states with partnerships new in invest we'll year this schools, our reform to states with worked we as just So wait. can't we know They own. their on funding pre-k raised have states 30 meantime, the in But

applause.) (Cheers, deficit. the to dime a adding without years, two next the over students million 20 and schools 15,000 than more connecting start to payment down a got we've Verizon, and Sprint, Microsoft, Apple, like companies and FCC the of support the with that announce can I Tonight years. four next the over broadband high-speed to students our of percent 99 connect to pledged also I year, Last

(Applause.) debt. loan student by trapped feel who Americans more even help can we how see to Congress with work to want I and income, their of percent 10 to payments loan student monthly their cap to opportunity the millions offering We're education. college a of out priced is kid class middle- no that so value, better offer to incentives more colleges and information more parents give to education higher of system our up shaking We're career. and job a to directly lead can that training hands-on and education real-world the offer that employers and colleges with them partner and schools high redesign to working We're

potential. full their reach and track on stay odds tough especially facing color of men young more help to initiative new a on corporations and foundations leading America's of some to out reaching I'm And

American. single every for off pays work hard and work, of dignity the honors economy our sure make to more do also we unless promise, empty an as Dream American the see will today workforce the entering people young many too and complete, be won't agenda opportunity our know we But us. gave country this chance same the have to child every want I and Michelle is, line bottom The

embarrassment. an it's 2014, in and wrong, is That earns. man a dollar every for cents 77 make still they but workforce, our half about up make women today, know, You

applause.) (Cheers, work. equal for pay equal deserve Women

applause.) (Cheers, succeeds. America succeed, women when believe I because deserves, she opportunity the woman every give to Street, Main to Street Wall from businesses House, White the Congress, together, come all let's year This applause.) cheers, (Laughter, episode. Men" "Mad a in belong that policies workplace with away do to time is It too. does father a what, know you And (Applause.) hardship. into running without parent sick or child sick a for care to off day a deserves mother A applause.) (Cheers, job. her sacrificing without baby a have to deserves she know, You

(Applause.) poverty. in family a raise to have ever should full-time works who one no that agree overwhelmingly Americans But about. all America's what That's success. incredible achieve efforts, their of virtue by who, those resent don't we and others, than money more earn will people some that understand Americans wages. stagnant by stifled ones only the not they're but jobs, lower-wage of majority a hold women Now,

theirs. raise to laws passed have states five wage, minimum the raise to Congress this asked I since year the In

morale. their boosted and stress financial their eased has that decision a that's and hour, an bucks 10 to raise a employees his gave just John (Laughter.) it. of more makes he now Only (Laughter.) dough. the make helps Nick and Minneapolis, in Pizza Punch of owner an John's Soranno. John boss, his with today here is Chute Nick own. their on it done have businesses Many

applause.) (Sustained America. for good it's economy; the for good It's (Applause.) wages. employees' your raise to can you what Do lead. John's follow to leaders business America's of more ask I Tonight

applause.) (Sustained poverty. in live to have not should you dishes, their wash or meals troops' our -- applause) (cheers, -- cook you if because hour an $10.10 least at of wage fair a employees federally-funded their pay to contractors federal requiring order executive an issue will I weeks coming the In too. should We turnover. reduce and productivity boost to way smart the as wages higher see Costco like corporations Profitable example. by lead to intend I executive, chief a as And on. this take you if you support will Americans act; to Congress for wait to have don't you say, I America, in legislator state governor, mayor, every To

board. on get to need does Congress more, millions reach to course, Of

raise. a 'em Give applause.) (Cheers, raise. a America Give yes. Say country. the of rest the join So program. bureaucratic new any involve not does It spend. to money more with customers businesses give will It families. help will This 10.10. remember: to easy It's $10.10. to wage minimum the lifting by that fix to bill a have Miller George and Harkin Tom And here. stood first Reagan Ronald when was it than less percent twenty about worth is wage minimum federal the Today

lives. their in point some at America in parents all of half about helps It that. about Think point. some at parents all of half about helps it now, Right Credit. Tax Income Earned the than work hard through up themselves pull families helping and inequality reducing at effective more are few and meet, ends make families help to take can we steps other are There

ahead. get Americans more help work, reward credit, the strengthen to together work let's So kids. have don't who workers single for enough do doesn't it that Rubio Senator like Republicans with agree I But

egg. nest a build to folks encourages that bond savings new a it's -- a It's MyRA. savings: retirement own their start to Americans working for way new a create to Treasury the direct will I tomorrow why That's 401(k)s. have don't who folks help doesn't that years, five last the over doubled has market stock the while And own. its on enough isn't often check Security Social A pension. a have don't workers most Today retirement. for save Americans help to more do Let's

can. chamber this in everybody like just work at save can they so job, the on IRA automatic an to access American every offer Americans, middle-class for nothing or little does but save, wealthy the help to breaks tax big gives that code tax upside-down an fix to me with work help, to wants Congress this if And in. put you what losing of risk no with return decent a guarantees MyRA

(Applause.) generations. future for alive homeownership of dream the keeps and again, ever crisis housing a for bill the footing from taxpayers protects that legislation me send home, their is make families many investment important most the since And

applause.) laughter, (Scattered that. fixing of process the in we're heard, haven't you case in And system. care health broken a than more hardship economic to families hard-working exposed things few decades, For security. financial on point last One

everything. lose to have don't you strikes, misfortune if that mind of peace the about, all is reform insurance health what That's bankruptcy. meant would've surgery that said, Amanda earlier, week one Just surgery. emergency had she 6th, January On pain. sharp a felt she 3rd, January On (Applause.) covered. got she 1st, January on But insurance. health get couldn't Arizona, from mom single and assistant physician's a Shelley, Amanda like someone that mean to used condition pre-existing a -- Now

(Applause.) plans. parents' their under coverage gained have 26 age under Americans million 3 than more Act, Care Affordable the of because Already,

(Applause.) million. 9 -- coverage Medicaid or insurance health private for up signed have Americans million 9 than More

seniors. of millions for costs prescription lowering and flat premiums Medicare keeping finances, Medicare's to years adding while this all did we And applause.) (Cheers, woman. a she's because just more charged be ever can woman No applause.) (Cheers, cancer. or pain back or asthma like condition pre-existing a for coverage denied or dropped be again ever can zero, none, American, no law, this of Because zero. number: another here's And

Amanda. like Americans of millions helping already that's law a repeal to votes something 40- another have not let's But (Applause.) up. add numbers the if see Let's differently. do you'd what America tell choice, increase people, more cover costs, cut to plans specific have you if again, So battles. old refighting in interested not are people American the that know I But (Laughter.) (Chuckles.) (Laughter.) law. this of merits the on friends Republican my convince to expect not do I Now,

against. we're what just not for, we're what say to people American the to it owe all We plenty. were 40 first The applause.) (Cheers,

way. that live to deserves one No sick. get don't they praying morning every work to go who people They're clerks. grocery tractor, the on out farmers -- with church to go and shop we people They're said. he friends, our and neighbors our They're families. commonwealth's his covering to comes it when possessed man a like he's But (Laughter.) totals. vote highest my got I where not That's country. the of part liberal most the not Kentucky's Now, tonight. here who's Kentucky, of Beshear Steve Governor to talk just having, is law this impact real the know to want you if And

(Laughter.) you. from hearing appreciate she'll plus, and mind, of peace some her give It'll application. the through her walk and mom your call Kids, up. sign to kids your on get Moms, (Applause.) covered. get them Help 31st. March by covered get them help to insurance health without someone knows who American every ask I tonight why That's right. Steve's

forward. nation this moved always has that spirit the that's -- that all, After

well. as dreams its pursue can generation next the sure make to family American one as together come still but dreams, individual our pursue can we responsibility, and work hard through that recognition the citizenship, of spirit the It's

applause.) (Cheers, democracy. our drives that account, bank our of size the not vote, our of power the be should It efforts. these support Let's vote. to hour half a than more wait to has one no that so reforms offered have and together came lawyer, campaign Romney's Governor and lawyer campaign my by chaired appointed, I commission bipartisan the And it. strengthen to together working are Democrats liberal and Republicans conservative but weakened, was Act Rights Voting the of part year, Last (Applause.) vote. to right everyone's for up standing means Citizenship

(Applause.) Hook. Sandy like schools or malls, shopping our and theaters movie our in Americans innocent visiting from tragedies more stop help to Congress, without or with trying, keep to intend I and afraid," not are "we say who country this over all officers police and pastors, students, parents, of courage the seen have I day. each us from steals violence gun that lives the for up standing means Citizenship

communities. our to serve to obligation an self-government; of work hard the in participation purpose; common of sense a demands Citizenship

you. Thank applause.) (Extended forces. armed States United the of women and men the and diplomats our than country their to more give Americans few that agrees chamber this know I And

(Applause.) over. be finally will war longest America's and year, this of end the by there mission our complete will we allies, our with Together role. support a to moved have troops our security, own their for lead the in now forces Afghan With Afghanistan. from home come already have troops our of 60,000 than More Iraq. of out are troops our all Today, Afghanistan. and Iraq in serving were Americans 180,000 nearly office, took I When secure. more is States United the free, us keep to lives their down lay and risk who civilians and troops extraordinary the of because Tonight,

future. own its for responsibility takes it as Afghanistan unified a support will we 2014, After

(Applause.) country. our against attacks launch not do terrorists that resolve our not: will thing one change, will Afghanistan with relationship our while For al-Qaida. of remnants any pursue to operations counterterrorism and forces Afghan assisting and training missions: narrow two out carry to allies NATO with Afghanistan in remain could Americans of force small a negotiated, have we that agreement security a signs government Afghan the If

(Applause.) missions. future in succeed to need they capabilities the in invest and uniform in women and men our with faith keep to have we budget, defense our reform we as And cyberattacks. like threats new combat and defenses our strengthening keep we'll home, at Here networks. terrorist of agenda the rejects that opposition the support we'll Syria, In networks. these disable and disrupt to partners with working keep to have we Mali, Iraq, Somalia, Yemen, In world. the of parts different in root take extremists other and affiliates al-Qaida as evolved has threat the defeat, to path a on leadership core al-Qaida's put we've While remains. danger that is fact The

vigilant. remain to have We

extremism. feed ultimately may and strength our drain that deployments large-scale -- us from prefer terrorists that those not fought, be to need that -- (applause) -- battles the fight must We conflicts. open-ended in mired be to daughters and sons our allow I will nor necessary, truly is it unless way harm's into troops our send not will I But office. this hold I as long as so do to hesitate never will I and people, American the protect to needed when force used have I chief, in commander As alone. military outstanding our on depend cannot security our and leadership our believe strongly I But

consequence. the for regard without countries their within strike we believe abroad people if safer be not will we for drones, of use the on limits prudent imposed I've why That's (Applause.) footing. war permanent a off move must America partners, foreign our of capacity the building by and efforts targeted more through networks, terrorist pursue aggressively and actively we as even So

world. the of rest the for example an setting and ideals constitutional our to true remaining by but action military and intelligence through just not terrorism counter we because -- (applause) -- Bay Guantanamo at prison the close we and transfers detainee on restrictions remaining the lifts Congress year the be to needs this ending, war Afghan the with And (Applause.) violated. being not is people ordinary of privacy that abroad, and here confidence, public on depends community intelligence our of work vital the because programs surveillance our reform will I Congress, this with working why, That's

stockpiles. War Cold on reliance own our reduce to us allowed and hands, wrong the into falling from materials nuclear prevent to countries 50 than more rallied has diplomacy American diplomacy. principled and strong including -- power our of elements all on depends leadership our security, our threats, complex of world a in see, You

fear. and terror dictatorship, of free future a -- deserve people Syrian the future the in usher to community international the with work to continue will we And (Applause.) eliminated. being are weapons chemical Syria's why is force, of threat the by backed diplomacy, American

(Applause.) side. their at be always will America knows that state Jewish a -- Israel of state the for security and peace lasting and Palestinians, for state independent an and dignity achieve to there; conflict the end to talks necessary but difficult the in engage they as Palestinians and Israelis supporting is diplomacy American speak, we As

uranium. enriched of levels higher of stockpile its eliminate to begun has Iran tonight, here gather we As decade. a in time first very the for -- program that of parts back rolled and -- program nuclear Iran's of progress the halted has that pressure, by backed diplomacy, American is it And

(Applause.) weapon. nuclear a obtaining from Iran preventing share: all we goal a achieve peacefully can we if see to negotiations in engaged we're partners, and allies our with And bomb. a building not is Iran that day every verify world the help inspections Unprecedented centrifuges. advanced installing not It's

(Applause.) today. adversaries powerful less with negotiate can America confident and strong a surely then Union, Soviet the with negotiate could Reagan Ronald and Kennedy F. John If bomb. nuclear a building not is Iran that community international the and us convinces that action verifiable on based be must to agree we deal long-term any trust; on rely don't negotiations these But away. wished be cannot that mistrust nations, our between mistrust the about clear we're and allies; our threaten which Hezbollah, like organizations terrorist for support Iran's about clear-eyed are We succeed. not may they difficult; be will negotiations These

succeed. to chance a diplomacy give must we security, national our of sake the For (Applause.) it. veto will I talks, these derail to threatens that now bill sanctions new a me sends Congress this if clear: be me let But possible. opportunity this make helped place in put we that sanctions The

war. of risks the without time our of challenges security leading the of one resolved have will we and nations, of community the rejoin to step important an take could Iran then -- enough soon know we'll and -- chance the seize do leaders Iran's if But weapon. nuclear a build not does Iran sure make to options all exercise to ready stand and sanctions more for call to first the be will I then opportunity, this seize not do leaders Iran's If (Applause.)

America. than opportunities those of advantage take to positioned better is one no And want. and fear from people free to markets, new expand to cooperation, greater forge to globe, the around understanding promote and good do to opportunities enormous the by but threats against defense our by just not defined is leadership our that remember let's finally, And

people. young among exchanges educational and cultural expanding also we're but commerce, of ties new building we're Americas, the In poverty. extreme end help and electricity to access double to governments and businesses together bringing we're Africa, Across future. country's their in say a have to and peacefully and freely themselves express to right the have people all that principle the for stand we Ukraine, In democracy. building of work hard the do to willing are who those supporting we're Burma, to Tunisia From known. ever has world the strongest the remains Europe with alliance Our

America." bless "God and kindness" your forget never will "We like, words with greeted were and typhoon, a by battered those aid to rushed civilians and Marines our when Philippines, the in did we as disaster, by devastated those to hand a extend and prosperity and security greater of future a shape allies, our support we where Asia-Pacific, the on focus to continue will we And

applause.) (Cheers, gold. the home brings and stadium Olympic the into blue and white red, the marches USA Team when commitment that of expression one see will world the week next And orientation. sexual or creed religion, or race of regardless being, human every of equality and dignity inherent the in believe we because them do we And security. long-term our promote help they because things these do We

them. advance to bear we burdens the and for stand we ideals the of because but might military our or economy our of size the of because simply not us, to turns world the issue, every On do. we what does world the in country other no Americans, fellow My

families. military remarkable our support and honor to forces join to continue all will we and home, at here jobs into leadership and skills their translate veterans our all help to working keep We'll (Applause.) need. they that -- care health mental the including -- care health the receive warriors wounded our and earned they've benefits the receive veterans our so backlog that slashing keep We'll life. civilian to returns heroes of generation new a close, a to draws war of time this As uniform. in serve who those than better this knows one No

know. to come I've families those of one about you tell me Let

touch. in stay to him told I and pictures, took and around, joked we And tack. a as sharp was He manner. easy an had man, young impressive strong, a was He ceremony. the program, the through me walked he Rangers, fellow his of some with Along D-Day. of anniversary 65th the on Beach Omaha at Ranger, Army proud a Remsburg, Cory met first I

brain. his in shrapnel underwater, down, face canal, a in him found comrades His Afghanistan. in bomb roadside massive a by killed nearly was Cory deployment, 10th his on later, months few A

day. every rehab grueling of hours procedures, and surgeries of dozens endured he's years, the Over move. barely could he speak; couldn't he hospital, the in him, met I time next the And coma. a in lay he months, For

again. country his serve can he when day the toward working he's and again, walk and again stand and again speak to learned he's day, by Day stronger. grown has Cory him, around community the and Craig, dad his like caregivers of support the with steadily, slowly, But side. left his on struggles still He eye. one in blind still is Cory now, Even

easy." is anything worth that's life in "Nothing says. he easy," been not has recovery "My

applause.) and cheers (Extended Cory. applause.) (Cheers, quit. not does he and up, gives never Remsburg Cory Class First Sergeant serves, he America the like loves, he Army the like And tonight. here is Cory

discouraged. or frustrated get we mistakes; make we stumble; we Sometimes easy. been never has democracy, our freedom, Our easy. come never has America that us remind Cory like women and men Americans, fellow my -- Americans fellow My

citizen. every for real made are founders our by paper to set words the that so law, the under equality and fairness and justice promote to fear; and tyranny from nations other free to achievement; individual of possibilities the expand and build and create to progress: of wheel the to shoulder collective our placed and aside things those put have we years, hundred two than more for But

reach. our within it's know I tomorrow, towards cast eyes our but today in firmly planted feet our with him, in best is what summoned Cory way the us, in best is what summon we if together; work we if But easy. is it of none -- us take will toil and dreams our as far as go us lets all for opportunity and shared widely is prosperity where strong; are communities and plentiful is work honest where America rising a -- kids our for want we America The

it. Believe

applause.) (Cheers, America. of States United the bless God and you, bless God
